---
layout: post
title: "Friends don't let friends use setwd"
categories: code
excerpt: "A Portable Approach to Multi-File Analysis in R"
tags: [reproducible research, work flow, R]
image:
  feature: daucus.jpg
date: 2015-01-26
---

**UPDATE:** To clarify, the following advice assumes you have some way to
get R running in the appropriate directory, and that may well require you
to use `setwd`, depending on the editor you are using. However, while
`setwd` may be necessary in interactive use, unless you have a very good
reason you shouldn't use it in your scripting! For more see
[my next post](http://plantarum.ca/code/setwd-part2/).
{:.notice}

A quick post this evening to make amends for earlier snarkiness on
[twitter](https://twitter.com/sedgeboy/status/559885042101784576)!

I was working through a new R 'package' this afternoon, investigating
whether it would be appropriate for a new project I'm contemplating. It
installed fine, although the web documentation didn't quite match the
installed code. Checking the R help, I see there's a GUI that I can start
with:

{% highlight r %}
load_GUI()
{% endhighlight %}

On trying that I get a 'file not found' error. As it turns out, this was a
consequence of the definition of `load_GUI()`, which was:

{% highlight r %}
load_GUI <- function(){
  source("/path/to/some/file.R")
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is a problem, as this path doesn't exist on my computer, or, quite
possibly, on any computer other than the package author's. The only way it
works is if you install the files in a particular way, and then make use of
`setwd` somewhere in your code. However, if you've gone to the trouble of
making a package, and then hard-code it to depend on a file arrangement
particular to your computer, you are (ahem) "*doing it wrong*".

The file in question does exist in the downloadables posted alongside (but
not in?) this particular package, and I managed to bungle through 
`file.R` until I came to another basic syntax error that lead me to
conclude the code quality was unlikely to repay further study.

It's unusual to find this kind of problem in a package. However, I often
see it when I get an assignment from a student, who has included a call to
`setwd` in their code. I try to be very clear about my requirements for
classes - your code must run on my computer. It can't do that if it
includes a line like:

{% highlight r %}
setwd("/home/richard/stats-class/assginment3")
{% endhighlight %}

This code will never run on my computer, because my name is not richard,
and I can spell 'assignment'. Once again, this is *doing it wrong*.

## Is `setwd` always wrong?

Yes.

`setwd` in an R package is undeniably wrong. There are much better
alternatives (see below). But what is wrong with using `setwd` for personal
scripts, some fine people on the twitter were wondering? Innocuous as it
seems, `setwd` is in fact a time-bomb, which will blow up when:

1. You hand in your assignment to your professor, who's cranky to begin
with
2. You send your code to your colleague
3. You get a new computer (which inevitably has a different file layout)

The second and third events are most likely to occur at some distance from
your original writing of the code; consequently, not only do you have to
figure out what your old code was supposed to do, but also *where* it had
to be!

## The right way

### Scripts
For most of us, writing relatively modest scripts for one-off analyses, the
easiest way to arrange our workflow is to put everything in a single
directory. Give it a useful name, and copy everything you need (data,
pre-processing code, analysis) into it. A simple project might look like:

    soil-analysis-2015-01-26/
    ├── analysis.R
    └── data.csv

If you have enough files to warrant more structure, you can use
sub-directories:

    soil-analysis-2015-01-26/
    ├── analysis.R
    ├── data.csv
    ├── meta-notes.txt
    └── soil-data
        ├── plot1
        └── plot2

Now you can refer to files from within your scripts without worrying about
exactly where they are in the file system: `plot1 <-
read.table("soil-data/plot1")`. And if you want to share this with a
colleague, you can `zip`- or `tar`- up the entire directory and they will
see exactly what you see.

As an added bonus, you can turn this one directory into a git repository.
For true geek Nirvana, you can put a markdown text file and a bibtex
database in there too, and then you've got an entire manuscript, all in one
place. But I'm getting ahead of myself.

### Packages

If you're writing packages, you no longer need to `source` anything. All
your code should be in the `R` directory. You can include 'private'
functions if you need to. As for data, `system.file()` provides one option
for portably getting to it, either from within functions or as part of the
examples in your help files.

I won't go on about packages, because there's really good information
available on that from [Hadley Wickham](http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/).

## For more:

- [RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/RStudio/) is a very
nifty tool with this workflow baked right in.

- Hadley Wickham has useful advice for writing
[solid R code](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/), even if you aren't building
packages.

- I have a slide deck on
[reproducible research](http://plantarum.ca/assets/docs/r-markdown.html)
using R and markdown. This includes material from some of
[Roger Peng's](https://github.com/rdpeng/courses) many online resources.
